Adding context for run query (#8892)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/run_query.md

title: "About run_query macro"
sidebar_label: "run_query"
id: "run_query"
description: "Use the `run_query` macro to run queries and fetch results; learn when it runs against the warehouse (including during `dbt docs generate`) and how to guard DML with `flags.WHICH`."
---

> The `run_query` macro provides a convenient way to run queries and fetch their results. It is a wrapper around the [statement block](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/statement-blocks), which is more flexible, but also more complicated to use. If you are new to `run_query`, refer to the Getting Started guide section on [using Jinja](/guides/using-jinja#dynamically-retrieve-the-list-of-payment-methods) for an example of working with the results of the `run_query` macro.

Reviewer: I don't see a "Getting Started" section in the guide
```suggestion
The `run_query` macro provides a convenient way to run queries and fetch their results. It is a wrapper around the [statement block](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/statement-blocks), which is more flexible, but also more complicated to use. If you are new to `run_query`, refer to the [using Jinja guide](/guides/using-jinja?step=8) for an example of working with the results of the `run_query` macro (step 8).
```

:::warning

> `run_query` can run during `dbt compile` and `dbt docs generate`, including when you don't expect it. Any DML inside `run_query` can execute unintentionally. Refer to [Preventing unintended DML execution](#preventing-unintended-dml-execution) for details.

Reviewer: I'm not clear on what "when you don't expect it" means. What's the scenario where the user wouldn't expect it to run but it does?

</File>

Use the `length` filter to verify whether `run_query` returned any rows or not. Make sure to wrap the logic in an [if execute](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) block to avoid unexpected behavior during parsing.

```sql
{% if execute %}
{% set results = run_query(payment_methods_query) %}
{% if results|length > 0 %}
    -- do something with `results` here...
{% else %}
    -- do fallback here...
{% endif %}
{% endif %}
```

> ## Preventing unintended DML execution {#preventing-unintended-dml-execution}

Reviewer: Can we discuss the approach here?

</File>

Use the `length` filter to verify whether `run_query` returned any rows or not. Wrap the logic in an [if execute](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) block so `run_query` does not run during parsing, when [`execute`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) is `False`.

```sql
{% if execute %}
{% set results = run_query(payment_methods_query) %}
{% if results|length > 0 %}
    -- do something with `results` here...
{% else %}
    -- do fallback here...
{% endif %}
{% endif %}
```

## How `run_query` runs during compilation and `dbt docs generate` {#run-query-compilation-and-docs}

> When dbt **compiles** models and other resources with a **live warehouse connection**, it evaluates your Jinja and runs any `run_query()` calls that your project reaches. That is normal: introspective macros need the warehouse the same way other compilation steps do. Compilation happens during **`dbt run`** and **`dbt build`**, and also during **`dbt compile`**, **`dbt docs generate`** (when compilation runs), and other commands that compile the project—not only during steps where you might picture dbt "building" tables.

Reviewer: Only note is I would remove the bolding from this and the following sections to match our style guide

Author: AH yes!

[`dbt docs generate`](/reference/commands/cmd-docs) **compiles your project by default** (unless you pass [`--no-compile`](/reference/commands/cmd-docs)). So `run_query()` runs during documentation generation under the same rules as other compile workflows, including for resources that are not part of a particular `dbt run` selection.

### `execute` is `True` during compilation

The [`execute`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) context variable is `True` whenever dbt compiles with a connection, not only while materializing models during `dbt run`. A guard like `{% if execute %}` still allows `run_query()` to run during [`dbt docs generate`](/reference/commands/cmd-docs) and [`dbt compile`](/reference/commands/compile), because those commands compile your project. Patterns such as `{% if execute and is_incremental() %}` change when incremental model SQL runs, but they do not turn off compilation itself—so they do not, on their own, skip `run_query()` during docs or compile unless your Jinja never calls it in those paths.

> If you want **DML** (`DELETE`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and similar) or other side-effecting SQL to run only for certain dbt commands, add another condition, for example [`flags.WHICH`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/flags#flagswhich).

Author: ```suggestion
If you want <Term id="dml" /> or other side-effecting SQL to run only for certain dbt commands, add another condition, for example [`flags.WHICH`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/flags#flagswhich).
```

### Scope side-effecting SQL with `flags.WHICH`

> Combine [`execute`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) with [`flags.WHICH`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/flags#flagswhich) so DML runs only when the active command is one you want (`run`, `build`, and so on), and not when dbt is compiling for `docs`, `compile`, or other commands where side effects would be surprising. Refer to the `flags.WHICH` table for the full list of command values.

Author: ```suggestion
Combine [`execute`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) with [`flags.WHICH`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/flags#flagswhich) so <Term id="dml" /> runs only when the active command is one you want (`run`, `build`, and so on), and not when dbt is compiling for `docs`, `compile`, or other commands where side effects would be surprising. Refer to the `flags.WHICH` table for the full list of command values.
```
